The Russia Investigations: What 'Collusion' Means Now

This week in the Russia investigations: If "collusion" is now fully partisan in the House, the Senate and the public, that is good news for the president.

The politics of the Russia imbroglio took a little-noticed but important break last week for President Trump and the White House.

Members of the seldom-seen Senate intelligence committee appear to have arrived at a partisan deadlock over whether Trump's campaign conspired with the Russian attack on the 2016 presidential election, as CNN's Manu Raju and Jeremy Herb reported.

That is not necessarily surprising — in fact, it was predictable. But it confirms that the senators, like their compatriots on the House intelligence committee, haven't uncovered a certified letter to Trump signed by Russian President Vladimir Putin requesting preferential policies in exchange for help in the election — or any other evidence of that magnitude.

If so (or not so), that answers one of the big questions about the Russia story we've been asking all along: Is what's out there now all there is? Raju and Herb's story makes it appear that for senators, the answer may be yes. What is known is all that can be known.

That, in turn, means that "collusion," which was never a legal term and always relied on the eye of the beholder, could remain open to interpretation.

Trump has always denied that members of his campaign conspired with the Russian active measures in 2016 and maintains that stance to this day. A party-line deadlock on both intelligence committees over the evidence in the case suggests that Republicans across the board feel confident about defending that position.

This has been true in the House for months. Now, if it becomes true in the Senate, the battle lines there not only will match in both chambers but also will mirror the apparent state of the country, where any given policy position matters less today than baseline allegiance to Trump — or "resistance" to him.

For Trump and Republicans, that means room to maneuver, especially in concert with the months-long campaign of attacks they've been waging against the FBI and Justice Department.

The ideal situation for the White House would have been to have no Russia imbroglio. But with the one it confronted, the current trajectory might be as good a political outcome as it could have hoped for: "Collusion" is a thing Democrats believe occurred and Republicans do not.

The ultimate outcome will depend on whatever issues from the office of Justice Department special counsel Robert Mueller.

Democrats lean in

If Trump's opponents won't concede the evidence is airtight, they nonetheless appear inclined to take this case to trial. In fact, Democrats are already making their own separate argument that there is enough evidence of a conspiracy in a lawsuit against the Trump presidential campaign, some members of Trump's inner circle during the 2016 cycle and the Russian government.

The case is there in plain sight, they argue:

A Russian government delegation visited Trump Tower in June 2016 and, by the admission of the very Trump campaign leaders who hosted it, provided a political opposition research tip about Trump's opponents. If that's not "collusion," per critics, it at least violates the U.S. campaign finance laws barring foreign help to American campaigns.
Republican political operator Roger Stone knew in advance, in this view, that the Russian government planned a special attack on Hillary Clinton's campaign chairman, John Podesta. (Stone denies that — more below.)
Trump's former national security adviser, Michael Flynn, pleaded guilty to lying to investigators about his negotiations with the Russian government in which he sought — and received — no retaliation to the punitive actions the Obama administration was imposing over the election interference. He also had allegedly decided before Inauguration Day to support a full or near-complete revocation of sanctions on Moscow.
Et cetera, et cetera — all twice-told tales by this point and ones in the public view for long enough that there's deep disagreement about what they mean.


House intelligence committee ranking member Adam Schiff, a California Democrat, said Russian operatives "previewed" their plan to release emails to Trump aides.
Aaron P. Bernstein/Getty Images
For Republicans on the House intelligence committee, these contacts simply were "ill-advised." And who is to say that all this wasn't just a supporting pillar in the broader wave of active measures?

The Russian government wanted to attack democracy across the West. As at least one former intelligence officer has speculated, the Trump Tower meeting or other contacts may have been intended not as deliberate outreach to make common cause with the campaign, but as an old-fashioned setup.

In the spy game, intelligence officers posted overseas must always be on watch for some kind of scheme to compromise them. Who can say whether the overtures to the Trump campaign were real or simply mischief meant to be discovered to jam up their targets?

(Russian intelligence mischief scales from clandestine break-ins in which operatives leave behind sexually explicit books to slashing tires, killing dogs and beyond.)

The "they were just messing with you" thesis might explain why the Russian operatives who importuned Trump campaign aides used as their bait the promise of Clinton's stolen or missing emails from the time she was secretary of state.

Maybe they had them — people inside Trump world certainly tried to verify what they were being promised — and maybe they didn't. Either way, the messages never actually materialized in public.

Then again, the U.S. intelligence community found, and Mueller's work has verified, that the Russians actually were backing a dog in this fight — in Trump.

To that end, other Democrats' emails did appear in 2016, even if Clinton's didn't — and for Democrats now, that is yet more evidence of a conspiracy.

House intelligence committee ranking member Rep. Adam Schiff, a California Democrat, said Russian operatives "previewed" their plan to release emails to Trump aides, who at very least didn't notify the FBI.

Later, Stone said on Twitter that Clinton campaign chairman Podesta would have his time in the "barrel," which Schiff suggests Stone got another "preview." Stone told NPR that isn't so. He also has said, however, that he is "prepared" in case he is indicted.

The uncertainty over whether he may — or who else might be — highlights how quickly the political situation in this imbroglio could change again.

Beyond "collusion"

"Collusion" does not enter into Mueller's mandate. The public order by which he was appointed directs him to investigate "any links and/or coordination" between individuals associated with the Trump campaign and the Russians and "any matters that arose or may arise directly from the investigation."

When Mueller charged the Russian cyber-operatives who used social media agitation to turn up the volume on controversy inside the United States, he didn't invoke "collusion."

The Justice Department charged the defendants with conspiring to "defraud the United States by impairing, obstructing and defeating the lawful functions of the government through fraud and deceit for the purpose of interfering with the U.S. political and electoral processes."

So for prosecutors, the public and partisan divide over what constitutes "collusion" is immaterial. The Justice Department was never going to charge anyone with "collusion" to begin with.

Even though months of attacks have corroded the public's view of Mueller and the investigation he is leading — especially among Republicans — the feds retain their power to investigate, arrest and charge.

BREAKS HERE

Who Is Stormy Daniels Lawyer Michael Avenatti — And Who Is Helping Him?

If you turn on the TV news these days, it's difficult to miss Michael Avenatti.

The lawyer for porn actress Stormy Daniels has been that way since his days in law school.

Professor Jonathan Turley remembered Avenatti as one of the best students at George Washington University Law School — a guy who stood out in class.

"He first spoke to me about his desire to join a litigation team in his first year and I joked that he might want to find out where his locker is before he joined a litigation team," Turley told NPR.

Avenatti was the first person in his family to graduate from college. He put himself through school by doing opposition research for political candidates — Democrats and Republicans.

This year, his legal and political paths have converged in spectacular fashion. Avenatti has turned what could have been a boring procedural fight over a nondisclosure agreement into a vehicle to attack Michael Cohen, the president's personal lawyer — and President Trump himself.

"He put a series of tripwires in front of the president's lawyer and Michael Cohen literally tripped over every one of them," Turley said.

In one sense, Avenatti may have been lucky, from his perspective. First, he sued on behalf of Daniels so she could escape the contract she signed pledging not to talk about the sexual relationship she says she had with Trump in 2006.

Trump denies there was a sexual relationship but he has acknowledged making the $130,000 payment via Cohen.

Then, as Avenatti and Daniels's lawsuit worked its way forward, the FBI raided Cohen's hotel room, office and home in New York City. Prosecutors revealed they'd been conducting a criminal investigation for months into his business dealings.

That gave Avenatti not only his own lawsuit but a separate federal case as avenues by which he could go after Cohen and Trump. Outside the courthouse in New York on Wednesday, Avenatti said he's just getting started.

"We've got a whole host of information that we're going to be releasing about Mr. Cohen and Mr. Trump, so they better buckle up," he vowed.

Avenatti won't say how he wound up representing Daniels, but said she wasn't referred to him by anyone with a political ax to grind.

NPR asked him whether he sometimes does or says things just to unsettle the president. He paused.

"No, I think I do and say things to advance the interest of my client and our cause and the cases at issue," he said in a brief interview. "And to the extent that may be unsettling to the president that's not surprising because he is a party opponent in litigation."


Adult film actress Stormy Daniels speaks to reporters as she exits a federal courthouse in New York City after a hearing related to Michael Cohen, President Trump's longtime personal attorney and confidante on April 16, 2018.
Drew Angerer/Getty Images
Who's paying the bills?

Avenatti says the Daniels case is funded entirely through crowdsourcing — he has received $525,000, toward a target of $850,000, according to the website CrowdJustice.

But money has become a touchy subject for Avenatti lately. This week, he told a judge he's a finalist for a trial lawyer of the year award — citing a jury verdict of $454 million. But in reality, the award in that case probably only will amount to a fraction of that.

"It's really misleading for anyone to talk about that verdict without noting that it's been massively reduced," said Ted Boutrous, a lawyer who opposes Avenatti in the case.

The verdict has been cut to $20 million, Boutrous said, and even that's now under appeal. Meanwhile, Avenatti's own financial situation has become news.

In court this month, a government lawyer said Avenatti missed a tax payment connected to the bankruptcy of his law firm, Eagan Avenatti.

Avenatti told NPR that his tax situation is beside the point.

"There's no question that these personal attacks are designed to undercut our case, and our message, and our efforts," he said. "There's no question that a lot of it is politically motivated. It's absurd frankly, it's malicious, it has nothing to do with the case."

There are a few more questions about Avenatti in legal circles.

This year, he released information about Cohen that appeared to come from a confidential government database. Attorneys for Cohen said that, for one thing, the material in Avenatti's file was partly inaccurate — it alluded to other men around the world named Michael Cohen, not their client.

But the correct Cohen's attorneys also acknowledged some of the material Avenatti released was legitimate, raising questions about how he was getting non-public, confidential financial records and then putting them out in the open.

The Treasury Department has launched an investigation.

Lawyers usually take care not to use materials that may have been gathered illegally and, in this case, attorney-client privilege does not seem to apply, legal ethics expert Mark Foster told NPR.

Eventually, Avenatti could be legally compelled to reveal his source — which would set up another public showdown with him at the center.

BREAKS HERE

House Intelligence GOP Releases Full Report Clearing Trump In Russia Imbroglio
April 27, 201810:34 AM ET
PHILIP EWING


House intelligence committee chairman Rep. Devin Nunes, R-Calif., has cleared Donald Trump's presidential campaign of conspiring with Russia's attack on the 2016 election.
Win McNamee/Getty Images
Updated at 11:55 a.m. ET

The House intelligence committee concluded its Russia investigation on Friday by releasing a heavily redacted copy of its full report clearing Donald Trump's campaign of any wrongdoing.

The 243-page report calls contacts between Trump campaign aides and Russians "ill-advised" and acknowledges that at least one person in the case may have given "incomplete" answers. But overall, it found, there was no conspiracy to work with the foreign operatives attacking the election.

President Trump touted the report on Twitter and said the "total Witch Hunt! MUST END NOW!"


Donald J. Trump
✔
@realDonaldTrump
 Just Out: House Intelligence Committee Report released. “No evidence” that the Trump Campaign “colluded, coordinated or conspired with Russia.” Clinton Campaign paid for Opposition Research obtained from Russia- Wow! A total Witch Hunt! MUST END NOW!

9:14 AM - Apr 27, 2018
120K
68.3K people are talking about this
Twitter Ads info and privacy
The fact of the attack itself is confirmed, described in detail and characterized as part of a decades-long policy by Russia to try to shape the political environment in the West via the use of "active measures."

The report reconfirms many aspects of those active measures, which included overtures by human intelligence operatives to Americans, including Trump aides; cyberattacks on state election systems; and the theft and release of Americans' emails as part of a scheme to embarrass them.

Entire pages of the report are blacked out, but committee chairman Rep. Devin Nunes, R-Calif., said he hopes a less redacted version might become available later.

"Given the substantial public interest at stake, the committee is publishing the redacted version we've received," he said. "However, we object to the excessive and unjustified number of redactions, many of which do not relate to classified information. The committee will convey our objections to the appropriate agencies and looks forward to publishing a less redacted version in the near future."

Republicans' report faults President Barack Obama's administration for what it calls a sluggish and disorganized response to the attack on the 2016 campaign. The FBI's conduct in dealing with victims of the Russian hacking, for example, is described as "largely inadequate." Most people who were hacked never got any notice.

In terms of collusion, however, the House intelligence committee accepted the denials of people involved who said they played no role in the Russian attack. The House committee says it found no additional evidence of collusion.

"While the committee found that several of the contacts between Trump associates and Russians — or their proxies, including Wikileaks — were ill-advised, the committee did not determine that Trump or anyone associated with him assisted Russia's active measures campaign," the report says.

Minority objections
Democrats say that result was a fait accompli.

Intelligence committee ranking Democrat Rep. Adam Schiff of California has complained about the limitations on witness interviews, the avenues of investigation the committee didn't pursue, the subpoenas it couldn't issue and other restrictions that he said meant Republicans didn't lead a real process.

"Their report, as with their overall conduct of the investigation, is unworthy of this committee, the House of Representatives, and most importantly, the American people, who are now left to try to discern what is true and what is not," minority Democrats wrote in their response.

One area on which Schiff and majority Republicans appear to agree is the need for the United States to strengthen its cyberdefenses and improve its voting security in order to safeguard elections in 2018 and beyond.

Intelligence officials warn that Russia's 2016 active measures never stopped and to expect interference campaigns through at least the next two major cycles in the United States, as well as in elections elsewhere in the West.

BREAKS HERE

'Sherlock' Star Benedict Cumberbatch Saves Cyclist From Muggers
June 2, 20181:43 PM ET
SHANNON VAN SANT


Benedict Cumberbatch and his wife, Sophie Hunter, were riding in an Uber when the 41-year-old actor jumped out of the vehicle after he spotted a mugging on Marylebone High Street in London.
AP
Actor Benedict Cumberbatch, who plays detective Sherlock Holmes in the television series Sherlock, foiled an attempted robbery by fighting off a gang of muggers in London. The attack occurred near his fictional character's home on Baker Street.

Cumberbatch and his wife, Sophie Hunter, were riding in an Uber when the 41-year-old actor spotted the attempted mugging on Marylebone High Street and jumped out of the vehicle. Four muggers were attacking a Deliveroo cyclist and attempting to steal his bicycle. According to witnesses, Cumberbatch screamed at the attackers and then dragged them off of the victim.

Uber driver Manuel Dias, 53, told The Sun, "I was taking Benedict and his wife to a club — but I didn't know it was him at first."

"I went to turn down into Marylebone High Street and we saw four guys were pushing around a Deliveroo cyclist. My passenger jumped out, ran over and pulled the men away. They turned towards him and things looked like they were getting worse, so I joined in. He stood there instructing them in the street, shouting, 'Leave him alone.' "

"Then it all got a bit surreal. Here was Sherlock Holmes fighting off four attackers just round the corner from Baker Street," Dias continued. "I had hold of one lad and Benedict another. He seemed to know exactly what he was doing. He was very brave. He did most of it, to be honest. They tried to hit him, but he defended himself and pushed them away. He wasn't injured. Then I think they also recognized it was Benedict and ran away."


In addition to playing the title character in Sherlock, Benedict Cumberbatch has starred in the Avengers: Infinity War and The Imitation Game.
Jordan Strauss/Invision/AP
After the attackers left, Dias said Cumberbatch asked how the cyclist was. When he said, " 'I'm OK,' Benedict just hugged him."

The Metropolitan Police released a statement about an incident that took place in November: "One of the males attempted to grab the victim's cycle ... He was then punched in the face, struck on the head and hit with his helmet."

"Nothing was reported stolen. The victim did not require hospital treatment. No arrests have been made."

Cumberbatch played the lead role in the Sherlock television series since 2010 and has starred in the films The Hobbit; Avengers: Infinity War and The Imitation Game.

"The cyclist was lucky; Benedict's a superhero," Dias said. "Benedict was courageous, brave and selfless. If he hadn't stepped in, the cyclist could have been seriously injured."

BREAKS HERE

Life Tries Clumsily To Imitate Art In 'American Animals'
May 31, 20185:01 PM ET
MARK JENKINS


American Animals tells the mostly-true story of four young boys who attempt to pull off a rare book heist. (L-R: Jared Abrahamson, Evan Peters, Blake Jenner, Barry Keoghan)
Film4
Stuffed with references to classic crime flicks, American Animals is British writer-director Bart Layton's clever and assured bid to rival Stanley Kubrick and Quentin Tarantino. The film is highly self-conscious, but no more so than its real-life antiheroes, a quartet of Kentucky college kids who study The Killing and Reservoir Dogs to plan a heist that turns out to be poorly scripted.

There's a lot going on in this movie, as Layton announces with a stylistically frantic introduction. He opens with a painting by John James Audubon and a quotation from Charles Darwin, before asserting first that the movie is not based on a true story and then that it genuinely is one. Quick cuts and flashy upside-down shots lead to the claim that "these boys weren't criminals."

Coming from an actual parent of one of them, the comment is the first clue that this sometimes-comic drama is laced with documentary. The story's central figures appear on screen as both fictionalized adolescents and — filmed years after the 2003-04 events — rueful real grownups. In a sense, the latter provide Layton's alibi. Perhaps the filmmaker doesn't have everything right, but even the participants can't entirely agree on what happened.

Basically, it was this: Two childhood friends, melancholy Spencer (The Killing of a Sacred Deer's Barry Keoghan) and cocky Warren (Evan Peters), decide to rob Transylvania University's rare book collection. Spencer is an art student with much skill but little inspiration. Seeking a wild experience he thinks will give his art depth, Spencer is excited when he learns that his college has lightly guarded copies of Birds of America and On the Origin of Species that are worth millions.

He sees that the treasures could be stolen easily. He doesn't get that fencing them would be a lot harder.

Warren is fed up with his sports scholarship and the father who groomed him to get it. Far more aggressive than his friend, Warren becomes the primary impetus for the plot, even after the pals recruit two additional conspirators who also aren't thinking clearly about their futures: an accounting student who wants to join the FBI (Jared Abrahamson) and a gym rat from a wealthy family (Blake Jenner). Their alienation from upper-middle-class life is depicted less clearly than Spencer and Warren's.

When the crime finally occurs, Layton switches styles yet again, filming the less-than-precision robbery with jittery handheld camera. But American Animals isn't exactly an action movie. The director borrows a gambit from Tarantino and Scorsese, punctuating the action with oldies that play as either exuberant or ironic. Yet Donovan and the Doors — let alone Leonard Cohen — can't turn the movie into a romp.

In fact, much of the film is devoted to regrets and recriminations, and the principal act of violence — which doesn't lead to permanent injury — is presented as queasily disturbing. Unlike Hollywood gangsters, the four thieves don't shoot or knife anyone, yet they're stunned by the awfulness of their action.

Almost as deflating as the ugly moment itself is the movie's epilogue. The young men's actual victim (impersonated in most of the film by Ann Dowd) offers a withering assessment of her attackers.

Layton is known for The Imposter, a smart 2012 documentary about a European man who posed as a missing Texas boy. American Animals is also about charlatans, but the key moments are not the ones in which the boys try to hustle other people into accepting them as more worldly than they really are. When they imagine themselves as Goodfellas or Reservoir Dogs, the book thieves are really conning themselves.

BREAKS HERE

'Adrift' In Time And Water, Lovers Battle To Find A Course
May 31, 20185:00 PM ET
SCOTT TOBIAS


In Adrift, two free-spirited lovers (Sam Claflin, Shailene Woodley) take an ambitious sailing trip...that's complicated by the arrival of a hurricane.
Kirsty Griffin/STXfilms
To date, the Icelandic director Baltasar Kormákur has made one film about a fisherman who survived in freezing water after his boat capsized off the Ireland coast (The Deep), another about a blizzard that wiped eight climbers off the summit of Mount Everest in 1996 (Everest), and now one more about a hurricane that pummeled a yacht in the middle of the Pacific Ocean, leaving its sailors wounded and badly off-course. Kormákur is a disaster artist, the type of a filmmaker who likes to take his camera outside and witness resilient humans doing battle against the indomitable forces of nature. He even sports the nice, bushy beard of a true outdoorsman.

Yet Adrift, his new film, succeeds because it's foremost a romance, even when the desperate necessities of survival command most of its attention. Based on the true story of Tami Oldham and Richard Sharp, two sailors who took their fateful ocean journey together in 1983, the film includes their courtship in Tahiti and their adventures at sea, but makes the crucial decision to interweave the two timelines, rather than follow a straight chronology. So what might have been a typical disaster movie about perfunctorily established characters heading into peril together—like, say, Kormákur's Everest—instead becomes a love story that keeps asserting and reinforcing itself as the film goes along. It's elegant in the cutting.

In order for Adrift to work as conceived, the chemistry between the stars is crucial, and Shailene Woodley and Sam Claflin, as Tami and Richard, sell the efficient sketchwork of the scripting. We have to believe that Richard could say a line like "I crossed half the world to find you" and not find it tacky or unbelievable, given their brief, whirlwind affair before hitting the water. Pieces of their backstories help sell their partnership: Both grew up with the sort of complicated family lives that had them gasping for fresh oxygen, and both share a devil-may-care sense of adventure. Their actions are physical and instinctual, and they develop an intimacy that's so much easier than dating rituals of fussbuckets confined to dry land.

As Tami and Richard figure out their next step, an elderly couple (Jeffrey Thomas and Elizabeth Hawthorne) approach Richard, the more seasoned sailor the two, with an offer: For $10,000 and two first-class tickets back to the island, would he be willing to dock their beautifully appointed yacht in San Diego? The money would be enough to fund Tami and Richard's frugal seafaring for a year, and even if it weren't, the opportunity to take this journey together has its own priceless appeals. So off they head across the Pacific until they run smack into Hurricane Raymond, which shreds the boat, knocks Tami unconscious, and leaves Richard with injuries so severe that he's entirely incapacitated. He can give guidance and support to Tami, but otherwise he's dead weight.

The ingenious structure of Adrift has one timeline chasing the other without ever catching up. The opening sequence finds Tami scrambling to find Richard and get her bearings after waking in a flooded cabin, then the film flashes back to her time working the docks in Tahiti, when she first trades come-hither glances with him. The earlier timeline takes a while to catch up to the point where the hurricane strikes, and the later one details a near-impossible to plan to drift toward the narrow target of Hawaii before the scant supplies of food and water run out. Scenes of the happy couple flirting at the market and doing their best From Here to Eternity on the shore are intercut with dangerous dives to free a jammed rudder and the rationing of canned sardines.

Yet past and present rhyme beautifully with each other, to where gestures of affection and acts of resilience become one and the same, like the shorthand that develops between lovers. Kormákur can't outdo the minimalism of All is Lost, which devoted itself purely to the quiet fight against mounting catastrophe, so he opts for a large-scale swooner with cinematography by three-time Oscar-winner Robert Richardson and emotions that suit the panorama.

There's a likelihood that Adrift would have been merely generic had it been sequenced more conventionally, but the effect of Tami and Richard communicating across an ocean of time gives the film a lift. The title has a double meaning, describing both their windswept amble through the Pacific and a shared philosophy of going wherever life takes them. If death is beyond the horizon, they're inclined to accept it and keep sailing off into the sunset.

BREAKS HERE
